If someone were to ask you,
"What is the communication
behavior that humans engage
in most
frequently?" You would probably
say, "Well, talking of course!"
But no matter how talkative
a person you are, there's
another element of
communication you engage in
far more frequently.
Though it may surprise you
to learn this, more than any
other form of communication
it is listening that we
engage in most frequently;
not that we are very good at
it mind you.
Study after study has shown
that rather than improving
as we grow older, as many of
our other skills tend to do,
our listening skills seem to
decline steadily
from early childhood
forward.
I bet you never considered
the possibility that a
kindergarten class could be
better listeners than high
school or college students,
but evidence suggests that
this is the case.
Moreover when compared with
the rest of the world,
Americans tend to be among
the worst listeners.
Being an effective
communicator depends on
having good
listening skills.
I just moved so it's
been really hard.
You know I mean my place is
a lot bigger
but I miss my
neighborhood.
I always felt a real strong
connection with them and my
best friend lived
across the street.
Now with all the work that
I have to take home I just
don't seem to have the same
kind of support system, you
know what I mean?
Yeah, and moving
is expensive too!
If you have any work that
you need done, painting,
carpentry, you've got a
friend, so let me know.
Have you ever felt sad about
having to move from a place
that you loved?
Well when you have to throw
something away that you'd
rather hang on to, that's
pretty tough, but it's just
what you have to do
when you move, you know.
Either that or
have a yard sale.
A good example of a failed
communication due in part to
poor listening skills.
There are things you can do
to become a more skilled and
conscientious listener if
you're willing to make the
effort, but before we give
you any strategies for
improving your listening
skills you'll need to know
what the term listening
means, how it works, and the
many different
forms it takes.
In this video we will
examine the practice of
listening as it pertains to
interpersonal communication.
We'll give a definition of
interpersonal listening and
we'll describe different
types of listening.
We'll talk about the
role of listening and the
interpersonal communication
cycle and we'll identify the
elements of
effective listening.
We will site common barriers
to effective listening and
then we'll enumerate
strategies for improving
listening skills.
We will begin by
defining the term.
There are probably as many
definitions of listening as
there are textbooks on
human communication.
Though they all use
different language with
different wording in their
definitions, they are all
describing the same thing.
For our purposes the most
effective way to begin to
define the practice of
listening is by comparing it
to the physiological
process of hearing.
You will note that I use the
term practice for listening
and process for hearing.
Why?
Well, to use a metaphor I
learned from a colleague,
you think of it as the
difference between a wink
and a blink.
A blink is a physiological
process that occurs without
our conscious awareness.
We blink literally thousands
of times per day without
giving it a thought.
A wink, on the other hand,
is a practice, a conscious,
deliberate, willful act.
It is the same distinction
between hearing
and listening.
Our sense of hearing
is really an ongoing
physiological process,
like our breathing
or our heartbeat.
The physiological process
of hearing involves the air
pressure and vibration of
sound waves acting upon the
human ear.
These sound waves are
picked up by the ear and
transferred to the central
nervous system as electrical
impulses for processing.
Listening, however, adds a
layer of complexity to this
process a consciousness, an
awareness that turns the
process of hearing into
the practice of listening.
Listening is a form of
meaning making, a cognitive
practice in which auditory
stimuli are separated,
organized, and categorized
in order for us to make
sense of them and
to act upon them.
But the practice of
listening is much more than
a cognitive active meaning
making, it is also
influenced by social,
cultural, and other
contextual factors with a
result that there are many
different types of
listening, many different
purposes for listening and
we will explore some of
those now.
Different situations
require different types
of listening.
For example, your listening
attitude will change if
you're in a social
conversation, at work,
or listening to the
news on the radio.
Discriminative listening
involves noticing both
verbal and non-verbal
aspects of a message.
Reading verbal and
non-verbal cues will help to
understand a speaker's
full meaning.
Comprehensive listening is
listening simply to learn,
without being
critical
or evaluating what's
being said.
Critical evaluative
listening, on the other
hand, does involve critical
thinking,
and evaluating a
message.
Empathetic listening
is when
we lend a
non-judgmental ear.
It is when the listener
attempts to feel with the
speaker and focuses on the
needs and concerns
of the speaker.
Appreciative listening is
the enjoyment of messages
for their own sake, for
example listening to music
or another artistic
performance.
This has been a
tough week for me.
Nothing is going right.
Our project manager just
told me she's quitting and
on top of all that my
mother's getting out of the
hospital next week and she's
going to need me to help!
Wow.
I'm sorry to hear
that, that is a lot.
You know there is someone
in sales that's looking to
switch departments, maybe he
can take over temporarily,
and who knows, maybe
he could be our guy.
That's a good idea.
Thanks.
At least to get
us over the hump.
I just want everything to
run smoothly, I don't want
to let anyone down.
Oh, don't worry about it,
Matt's a good guy and he
needs a change.
Hey, listen, if you need to
take time off to take care
of your mother, that's fine.
Brad and I, we can command
the ship together.
Thanks, I appreciate that.
When we examine the role of
listening in interpersonal
communication, we must think
of the listener as an equal
partner in the
communication process.
The dynamic process of
listening is an integral
part of the
communication cycle.
This last exchange
illustrates positive skills
of listening in a successful
communication cycle.
It seems that they have both
gained something from the
exchange and therefore they
have likely strengthened
their relationship which
will enable successful
communication in the future.
This cycle of communication
is constantly in motion,
moving between attending,
staying focused while
demonstrating interest
through short affirmations
that acknowledge and
recognize the speaker.
Correlating and storing
information, absorbing the
verbal and non-verbal
information
being communicated.
Actively seeking feedback,
questions that help the
speaker present
his or her ideas.
Responding, first with
feedback to let the speaker
know how we have interpreted
and understood his or her
message and then with a
reply that advances
the conversation.
We should also realize that
skillful listening is as
active as speaking and
sometimes
even more difficult.
We can begin to appreciate
this when we break down the
various elements
of listening.
Attention, voluntary or
involuntary, we can only
attend to a small portion
of the constant stream of
auditory stimuli that
crosses our ears.
In some cases we will
readily pay attention to
another's words as a doctor
might with a patient or an
attorney with a client.
In other instances such as a
radio or TV advertisement,
someone or some thing must
attract our attention.
Interpretation, we must
think about the things that
we listen to and ensure that
we understand them properly
before we can take any kind
of action concerning what
we've heard.
Interpretation begins with
this understanding and then
moves into a more evaluative
mode where we weigh the
meaning of the message
and its relationship
to ourselves.
Response feedback, our
feedback style, how we
respond to another's words
will help determine the
course of the
interaction to follow.
We can respond positively,
negatively, or even in a
neutral manner and each of
these response styles will
impact the other
person's own responses.
Memory recall, a critical
dimension of listening is
storing and retrieving
the information received.
Effective listeners will
continuously compile and
organize the information
they receive.
A good memory, and the
ability to readily recall
can be a valuable asset in
any communicative exchange.
We can easily improve these
skills with practice
and dedication.
Underlying these elements
are the two over arching
conditions for effective
listening; self awareness
and awareness of the other.
Effective listening is built
upon self awareness;
our sense of self
requires our interaction
with other people.
We are social
creatures after all.
We are who we are only in
relation to the others in
our world.
In our self-concept our
conscious awareness of
ourselves as unique
individual beings is shaped
by language because part of
this self concept or self
identity is our inner voice.
This inner voice can play
an important role in our
abilities as communicators,
but to become effective
listeners we must become
conscious of our inner
dialog and be aware of its
role in our attentiveness
and our understanding
of others.
Self awareness also plays an
important part in listening
because it means
knowing one's self.
Knowing yourself means
having an awareness of your
basic beliefs and
principles, your likes and
dislikes, your biases,
everything that informs your
unique perspective and
shapes your actions
and judgments.
By knowing ourselves we'd be
able to receive, interpret,
and understand what
others communicate to us.
The other fundamental
condition of listening is
one's awareness
of the other.
An effective listener
will always aim for an
understanding of
the perspective
of the
person speaking.
One can strive to go even
further though, for a deeper
understanding of the other's
perspective, and that is to
have empathy for
the other person.
Empathy is the ability to
identify with and understand
another person's feelings.
Empathy will improve your
overall listening skills and
can only be achieved through
effective listening.
Let's review these crucial
elements
for effective listening.
Self awareness, awareness
of the other, and empathy.
Attention, interpretation,
response feedback,
memory recall.
When all the elements of
effective listening are in
play, the result is a
supportive environment for
interpersonal communication.
Defensiveness prevents a
listener from concentrating
upon the message.
Defensiveness begins with
psychological insecurity on
the part of a
listener receiver.
It is really the fear of
criticism from another.
Superior and dogmatic
attitudes are hallmarks of
the defensive personality.
Defensive climates are
created by evaluation of the
other or his or her ideas.
Attempts to control the
conversation or situation.
Use of strategy or
concealed motivations.
Being neutral, uninvolved,
an attitude of superiority,
being certain, or dogmatic.
In contrast a supportive
environment is characterized
by non-judgmental
description, spontaneity, or
non-calculating behavior
empathy or identification
with the speaker, equality
with mutual trust
and respect.
A shared openness to
experience and explore in
the relationship.
Thank you.
Okay so for this project I
will take the airlines and
the automotive and you can
have direct mail
and house wares.
Hey, it sounds like you've
got it all figured out.
In fact I'll take the
airlines and automotive
because I already have
the contacts for those.
Do you?
You know I just wish you
wouldn't come on so strong.
We're supposed to
be in this together.
How would you have started?
Well for starters I wouldn't
have just said which ones I
wanted, I would have asked,
"What parts do you want?"
Well then what are you
complaining about?
If you would have asked me I
would have told you I wanted
airline and automotive and
we'd be right back
where we started.
[sighing]
Here we see both
parties demonstrating weak
communication and
listening skills.
It's a clear example of a
defensive environment and
egocentric attitudes.
Neither person made an
adequate effort to open the
lines of communication, to
empathize, or to create a
supportive environment, and
so nothing was resolved and
communication broke down.
There are many forces that
prevent us from listening
effectively, some
internal, some external.
Many communication scholars
use the general term "noise"
to describe these forces
which can include anything
that interferes with the
sending or reception
of a message.
Our focus here of course is
on the receiver's end
of the message.
Distractions, these types of
noise can be either internal
or external and can include
literal sonic noise,
traffic, construction, loud
music, or chatter, as well
as internal noise such as
tiredness, worries,
anxiety, etceteras.
All of these can lead
to a lack of attention.
Egocentrism, if a person
believes the world revolves
around him, he will likely
be a particularly
poor listener.
Such people tend to downplay
the concerns of the speaker
and are likely to respond
only with their concerns.
For example, after listening
to a co-worker describe her
aches and pains, such a
person might well exclaim,
"You!
You think you've got aches
and pains, well let me tell
you about me!"
Ethnocentrism, this is
a cultural barrier to
listening in which the
listener's attitude is that
his culture, be it
ethnicity, nationality, or
religion is superior to that
of the speaker and so he or
she fails to take the
speaker seriously.
Lack of empathy, empathy as
we know, is the ability to
identify with and understand
another person's feelings
or difficulties.
Empathy goes beyond the mere
ability to relate to another
person, and into the realm
of shared experiences.
Without the benefit of
empathy the well intentioned
listener is limited to the
realm of sympathy which is
akin to feeling sorry for
someone without actually
understanding their dilemma.
Leading questions, a leading
question is a question posed
with the intention
of producing
a pre-determined answer.
Leading questions skew
feedback and distort the
intended meaning
of the speaker.
Defensiveness, when being
defensive the listener
reacts emotionally rather
than intellectually.
Defensiveness tends to flair
up when a listener is upset
or is being confronted with
an uncomfortable truth.
These scenarios occur most
often when there is a power
imbalance between speaker
and listener and the speaker
is in the dominant role.
Think of the
teacher/student,
boss/worker,
parent/child dynamic.
Defensiveness is a
particularly daunting
barrier to effective
communication because once
the listener begins to react
defensively, he or she is
shutting out everything the
speaker is saying and no
further progress
can be made.
The unfortunate thing is
that in these cases the
speaker often genuinely
has the listener's best
interests at heart.
Although there may be many
barriers that prevent people
from listening effectively,
the good news is that there
are also strategies you can
employ to consciously become
a better listener.
By being conscious of the
barriers that can render
listening ineffective, you
will be better prepared to
recognize these barriers and
take steps to avoid them.
The more self aware you are,
the more effective you will
be as a listener.
As you listen you can
practice the skill of
introspection, this means
observing your own internal
and non-verbal reactions.
Monitor your self talk and
other inner reactions like
getting angry, becoming
indifferent, or daydreaming.
Voluntary attention, a best
case scenario is one where
the listener willingly and
enthusiastically lends an
ear to the speaker.
Patience, listeners often
find themselves in the
position of wanting
to say something.
It is actually more
productive to hold your
tongue and let the speaker
arrive at a conclusion.
Patience is really a form of
communicative discipline on
the listener's part.
It is having the ability to
allow the speakers to have
their full say and resist
the temptation to cut them
off, chastise them, lecture
them, scold them, etceteras
which could provoke
defensiveness or shut down
the communication entirely.
Patience also entails
respect and the capacity to
listen with consideration
recognizing a speaker's
expertise in his
or her own affairs.
Silence is particularly
challenging for many of us.
It's not easy to keep quiet,
but silence indicates that a
listener is receptive
and will not interrupt.
Observe communication cues.
By this we mean being
attentive not only to what
the speaker
is saying, but
to the entire
communication environment.
The context, this includes
the full range of non-verbal
communication, facial
expressions, eye behavior,
tone, pitch, gestures, mode
of dress, etceteras, as well
as the physical environment
where the communication
takes place.
Empathy, while we really
can't teach empathy as a
strategy, it stands to
reason that the more
experienced and well rounded
an individual becomes, the
greater his or her capacity
for empathy becomes.
Non-judgmental responses,
the manner in which we
respond to the speaker will
have a profound impact on
what he or she says next.
The worst thing a listener
can do is to condemn or
judge a speaker; this would
only shut the speaker down
and bring communication
to a standstill.
By the same token we should
let go of the popular notion
that criticism is necessarily
a negative thing.
The word has a negative
connotation, but in fact
constructive criticism
can be effective.
Constructive criticism
avoids judgment and
accentuates feedback
that can be positive
or productive.
Questioning, actively
seeking feedback is a very
important part of this
process and questioning can
be an important technique
for effective listening.
We have seen the potential
damage caused by leading
questions, but used
strategically, and
appropriately questions can
help the speaker communicate
while also helping the
listener to understand.
Questions should be used
to facilitate healthy
communication and not to
control the conversation.
The goal of questioning is
to help the speaker express
his or herself more fully.
Different types of questions
can be useful in different
ways to develop a
communicative exchange.
These can include questions
that: clarify, paraphrase,
summarize, explore, support.
Tone of voice has a lot to
do with how a question is
received, as in
"Are you kidding!"
versus, "Are you kidding?"
The old adage holds true,
"it's not what you said,
it's how you said it."
In general effective
questioning is a technique
that helps guide and
give shape to feedback.
With time and practice you
will learn how to phrase
questions so that you elicit
the greatest clarity
of response.
As a result you'll become
a truly accomplished and
effective listener.
Listen I'm really sorry
that I had asked for Tony's
opinion on the new campaign.
He said some pretty awful
things and I just wish I
didn't ask for his thoughts.
I don't think you have to
worry about it, but I know
exactly what you mean.
I think sometimes he just
shoots his mouth off without
thinking about it.
I wanted to ask him to write
me a letter for law school,
but now I'm not so sure.
You're applying
for law school?
You'd make a great lawyer;
you have that fighting
spirit about you!
Thank you, but I'm a little
worried about the scores so
that's why I wanted Tony to
write me the letter because
he's got a lot of clout.
This clearly was a
successful exchange.
The listener exhibits
extraordinary listening
skills by relating to and
empathizing with he speaker,
thus the ensuing dialog is a
free and open feedback loop
of confirming responses
and good will.
It's a great example
of empathic listening,
questioning, and creating
a supportive environment.